Add documentation and sample on KV cache eviction (#1960)
openvinotoolkit/openvino.genai: site/docs/concepts/optimization-techniques/kvcache-eviction-algorithm.md

---

# KVCache Token Eviction Algorithm

## Overview
The cache eviction algorithm is designed to manage KV (Key-Value) cache memory for large language models (LLMs) during text generation. It determines which blocks of tokens should be evicted from the KV cache based on importance scores calculated from attention scores across different attention layers.

## Conceptual Model
The KV cache for each sequence is divided into three logical areas:

> ![KV cache layout with cache eviction](./images/kv-cache-areas-diagram.svg)

Reviewer: Images should be placed at `site/static/img` directory and referenced here from this directory:
```suggestion
![KV cache layout with cache eviction](/img/kv-cache-areas-diagram.svg)
```

Author: Done

* Start Area: Initial tokens that are never evicted
* Evictable Area: Tokens that can be evicted based on importance scores
* Recent Area: Most recent tokens that are preserved (never evicted)

> The sizes of all three areas can be configured by modifying corresponding fields in a `CacheEvictionConfig` struct, which itself is a part of the pipeline-wide `SchedulerConfig`.

Reviewer 2: I suggest to specify defaults. Also if there is a way to refer to the struct, let's add the reference.

Author: Specified the defaults since there is no linkable API reference yet.

This approach allows LLMs to handle long sequences efficiently by keeping the most contextually important tokens in the cache while evicting those of lesser importance.
The downside of the eviction procedure is potential loss of generation accuracy, since the cache no longer contains the entire context for the generation, but only the most "important" token blocks.
The user can adjust the individual sizes of the eviction sub-areas to hit the optimal point of accuracy/memory usage tradeoff in their particular case.

Note that currently the eviction only starts after the full prompt has been processed, i.e. no eviction takes place during the prefill phase.
This means that for longer prompt sizes the maximum cache usage may exceed the limit defined by the `CacheEvictionConfig` parameters. 

After the prefill phase, however, the maximum cache occupancy for each sequence currently being processed is strictly limited by the combined sizes of the 3 areas described above. 
`CacheEvictionConfig.get_max_cache_size_after_eviction()` can be queried to get this cache size limit in tokens.

## Sample - impact of cache eviction on possible generation length and prompt throughput

> [limit_checker.py](https://github.com/openvinotoolkit/openvino.genai/tree/master/tools/continuous_batching/limit_checker.py) can be used to visualize the impact of the cache eviction algorithm on the end performance of the generation pipeline.

Reviewer 2: I assume it works on Linux only. Let's add a note about it or specify it at the beginning of the script or in the description/help.

Author: There is no such limitation in the script code, and I think that the pipeline itself also works on Windows now.

With `--mode gen_throughput`, the script will run a binary search to determine the minimum number of concurrently processed sequences to hit the 100% cache utilization.

## (Optional) Cache Rotation
By default, no additional cache modification is performed during eviction. 
Most LLMs employ some kind of positional embedding at some point in the inferencing, which effectively becomes associated with each per-token KV cache vector as well. 
The popular RoPE positional embedding is more or less continuous in the linear space of the token positions, but when token eviction takes place, the continuity of the remaining blocks is disrupted.
This may impact the ability of the model to correctly recognize the relative positions of the remaining blocks and degrade the generation accuracy.

Cache rotation seeks to alleviate this by "re-rotating" corresponding blocks so that the blocks that remain after each eviction are once again "continuous" in terms of the effective RoPE embedding. 

> It can be enabled by setting the `CacheEvictionConfig.apply_rotation` field to `true`.

Reviewer 2: Specify the default.

Author: Done

---

# KVCache Token Eviction Algorithm

## Overview
The cache eviction algorithm is designed to manage KV (Key-Value) cache memory for large language models (LLMs) during text generation. It determines which blocks of tokens should be evicted from the KV cache based on importance scores calculated from attention scores across different attention layers.

## Conceptual Model
The KV cache for each sequence is divided into three logical areas:

![KV cache layout with cache eviction](/img/kv-cache-areas-diagram.svg)

* Start Area: Initial tokens that are never evicted
* Evictable Area: Tokens that can be evicted based on importance scores

> * Recent Area: Most recent tokens that are preserved (never evicted)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Recent Area: Most recent tokens that are preserved but migrate to the Evictable Area with iterations of text generation.
```

Author: Done
